
How to install and use Quiver
=============================

Quiver is bundled in SMRTanalysis version 1.4 and later.  The easiest
way to get Quiver is to install the most recent version of SMRTanalysis.

If you want to install Quiver as a standalone package from the latest
bleeding-edge code, follow the instructions below.

*Note: please install this software on an isolated machine that does
not have SMRTanalysis installed.  Older versions of SMRTanalysis
pollute the ``PYTHONPATH``, which has the undesirable effect of
overriding ``virtualenv``-installed modules.*

Background
----------
**Quiver** is an algorithm for calling highly accurate consensus from
multiple PacBio reads, using a pair-HMM exploiting both the basecalls
and QV metrics to infer the true underlying DNA sequence.

Quiver is available through the ``quiver`` script from the
``GenomicConsensus`` package.  To use Quiver, the following PacBio
software is required.

- ``GenomicConsensus``, containing ``quiver``
- ``ConsensusCore``, a C++ library containing the core computational
  routines for Quiver
- ``ConsensusCore2``, a C++ library containing the core computational
  routines for Arrow
- ``pbcore``, a package providing access to PacBio data files


Required libraries and tools
----------------------------
To install the PacBio software, the following are required:

- Boost  >= 1.4.7   (standard C++ libraries)
- SWIG   >= 2.0.7   (library wrapper generator)
- Python 2.7.3
- virtualenv        (builds isolated Python environments)

If you are within PacBio, these requirements are already installed
within the cluster environment.

Otherwise, you will need to install them yourself.  The automatic
installation script requires that the ``swig`` executable is in your
UNIX ``$PATH`` and that your boost installation can be found under
``/usr/include`` or ``/usr/local``.


Data file requirements
----------------------

To make the most accurate consensus calls possible, Quiver makes use
of a battery of quality value metrics calculated by the basecaller.
If you are using a SMRTportal installation verision 1.4 or later, then
SMRTportal will load all the information Quiver needs, so you
can skip the rest of this section.

In SMRTportal versions 1.3.3 and prior, by default only a subset of
these quality values are included in the ``.cmp.h5`` files produced by
SMRTanalysis.  To get a ``.cmp.h5`` with all the QVs loaded, you will
need to use the ``RS_Mapping_QVs`` protocol to create a ``cmp.h5``
file for Quiver.

If you are using an older version than SMRTportal/SMRTanalysis 1.3.3,
please upgrade.


Installation instructions
-------------------------

Step 1: Set up your Python environment
``````````````````````````````````````
I recommend using a Python *virtualenv* to isolate your sandbox.

To set up a new virtualenv, do ::

    $ cd; virtualenv -p python2.7 --no-site-packages VE-QUIVER

and activate the virtualenv using ::

    $ source ~/VE-QUIVER/bin/activate


Step 2: Install PacBio libraries
````````````````````````````````
To install the PacBio software, execute ::

    $ pip install pbcore

    $ git clone https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/ConsensusCore
    $ cd ConsensusCore; python setup.py install --swig=$SWIG --boost=$BOOST

    $ pip install git+https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/ConsensusCore2

    $ pip install git+https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/GenomicConsensus

where you replace ``$SWIG`` with the path to your ``swig`` executable
and ``$BOOST`` with the path to your boost install (the top level
directory).  (Note that if SWIG is in your ``$PATH`` and boost is in
``/usr/local`` or ``/usr/include/``, you do not need to specify these
flags on the command line---``setup.py`` will find them).


Step 3: Run Quiver
``````````````````
Those who wish to call consensus on a resequencing job can simply use
the ``quiver`` script that has been installed in your
virtualenv (from `GenomicConsensus`).

For example, ::

    $ quiver -j8 aligned_reads.bam              \
    >        -r path/to/lambda.fasta            \
    >        -o variants.gff -o consensus.fasta

will use 8 CPUs to run Quiver on ``aligned_reads.bam``, outputting
the consensus sequence and variants.

Note that if you are using a cmp.h5 file and have not used the `RS_Mapping_QVs`
protocol to generate that file---or if the source bas.h5 file was generated by
pre-1.3.1 instrument software---the cmp.h5 will not contain the full battery of
QV metrics required for optimal Quiver accuracy.  The command will still work,
but it will give a warning that its accuracy will be suboptimal.

Step 3.5: Run Quiver on Multiple Input Files
````````````````````````````````````````````
Multiple alignment files in a FOFN (File of File Names) can be quivered against
a single reference (`GenomicConsensus` >= 1.1.0).

An example input FOFN::

    $ cat aligned_reads.fofn
    /path/to/reads1.bam
    /path/to/reads2.bam

can be used instead of a reads file::

    $ quiver -j8 aligned_reads.fofn             \
    >        -r path/to/lambda.fasta            \
    >        -o variants.gff -o consensus.fasta

Quiver can also be used with DataSet XML files. See pbcore for details on
generating new DataSet XML files for your alignment files.

Step 4: Highly-accurate assembly consensus
``````````````````````````````````````````
Quiver enables consensus accuracies on genome assemblies at accuracies
approaching or even exceeding Q60 (one error per million bases).  If
you use the HGAP assembly protocol in SMRTportal 2.0 or later, Quiver
runs automatically as the final "assembly polishing" step.


Resources
---------
Here is an `FAQ document`_ to address common issues.

For a technical summary of some of the details of how Quiver works, I
recommend reading the supplementary material of our 2013 *Nature
Methods* `HGAP paper`_


.. _`FAQ document`: https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/GenomicConsensus/blob/master/doc/QuiverFAQ.rst
.. _`HGAP paper`: http://www.nature.com/nmeth/journal/v10/n6/full/nmeth.2474.html
